Week 3 readings
Readings: CSB Ch. 4, 5 (pp. 100-109), Ch. 7 (pp. 158-top of 161); Sandercock

Week 4 readings
Readings: CSB Ch. 5 (pp. 112-116), 6 (pp. 141-154), 7 (157-161), MP (50-58, 69-71, end of p. 104)

Week 5 readings
Readings: CSB Ch. 7 (pp. foot of 163-166); MP (100-113); Kennedy

CSB 4


cities grew like crazy after civil war, especially chicag, detrioit n pittsburgh, before you could take strolls in the countryside now the ctiy streched out for miles

people then thought cities looked like hell
however ppl went there because they understood how to live in a city

trasportation improvements turned the city into divided sections

-----Railroads and Industrial Growth-------
American cities grow because of land speculation, industry and most important commerce (having shopping centers)
people called for a new south, but whites didn't wanna give up racial supremacy
Atlanta,  Birmingham was an example, 
instead what happenend was the North took all of South's profit and white Southerners were poor
Western cities developed becuase of railroad gov't subsidies
depending on the geographic region (desert) western cities did not grow until a railroad was built there
others towns such as Omaha didn't need it because they were centers of commerce
in 1860 the French and Americans figured out how to make high-quality steel. In 1870-1880, ppl figured out how to use electrical energy to get machines going. They also put financial securities on their business so stockholders don't run them into debt
cities had resources for almost everything
environmental factors were not taken into account and people were affected
before civil war, cities didn't need industry, after people felt like they should go toghether

-----the Growth of Mass Transit------
before then rich people owned transportation, now everyone could do it
what they did was install rails run by horses
cheap transit coincided with racism. In the South star cars were for only white people, but Africans were not having it. They petitioned gov't and they lift all differences in streetcars
when the Jim Crow laws were introduced, Africans protested again
as construction continued, the railroad roads recevied maintenance restrictions
other companies wanted to put light and water in railroad stops they disregard any problems it could bring
Then people started to use mechanical power, like using a pulley system on a hill
cable cars were used in San Francisco and Chicago, but broke down too much
Electric trolleys replaced everything in the 1890's. Charles J. Van Depoele did the job
survey done in 1890's shows cities used  various forms of transportation
all followed fixed routes and predictable schedules
next century companies put them on stilts to avoid walking traffic
Subways also did the job but they were more expensive. (elevated railways, els) came out
in subways you can travel farther in less time, the land value around subways soared, but wealthy people did not like the noise of the els
however companies kept getting bothered by gov't. problem was they had to spread all over the city, but didn't have the money to
when reformers found out transit compaines worked w/ corrupt politicans they set up municipal ownership after WWI

----The Outward Sprawl of the Streetcar City------
Sidney Geroge Fisher said in 1859 that cities will spread because of transportation
Cities grew differently based on population density and land specualtion
Ernest Burgess said in 1925 that cities became concentric, but this was a general pattern
before mass transit, only the wealthy could afford it
Now the rich could live in safe neighborhoods away from the city
surburban builders thought they could bring the city to the suburbs, they couldn't
suburban development was not uniform, comunters had to walk to commuter rails to get to the more powerful mass transits in the city
in 1890's construction sped up the building of houses
Afican Americans lived in cottages
Homeownership vaired, but immigrants tended to own more houses than the native-born
people who were too poor could not afford to move to the outer neighborhoods
cities annexed suburbs to get more taxes 

----the growth of commercial use and industrial districts----
mass transit turned the city to a working district
Retailing appeared as department stores, gender ideas changed as banks were made for men and clothing stores made for women
secondary businesses such as supermarkets appeared near transit stops
cities continued to grow
mass transit seperated everything

-----Parks and commercial amusements-----
at first workers would get off work whenever and mess around, but then employers got strict and imposed higher workloades
people wanted parks, they used to hang in cemetaries, they wanted them for festivals ,public meetings, and formal hunting
New York Central Park came out in 1850 because bankers wanted to say NY was cosmopolitan, rich people wanted to raise land speculation and Andrew Jackson Downing said parks preach temperance better
Olmsted (supervisior) made the park a quiet place to stop men from seeking vicious, dangerous adventure. Made so that ppl can calm down. So men were vicious back then
it was an instant sucess and Olmstead said the park calms ppl down a lot
Olmstead, Vaux and H.W.S. Cleveland did this in many urban cities
as gas and electricity spread, going out was safer, people had more money. to protect respectability ppl made their theaters racist against black ppl
Prostitution grew in cities but were pushed to seperate districts
in the center of the city all races mixed, although it was the counterpoint

---Population Mobility
because of mass transportation, people can move to different houses more
today analysts estimate 35% Americans live in a different home than they did 5 years ago
people moved to escape high rent ... or moved because their lives got better
people did not care about neighborhood spirit they just wanted to live better lives

CSB ch. 5
people came from the countryside to live in cities
living rurally sucked, drought and plagues hit and the services pail in comparison to cities
People left because their life was boring. they said it would be better in cities, everything was built for them anyway
American cities increased to 10 mills in early 1900's because of immigration and more births
immigrants went  to the cities and made America an urban place

------Waves of Immigration-----
Immigration had three major waves 1840-1880's, 1880's -1924, and 1965 to present
First wave - Irish,German,English and Scandinavian and Chinese. They went to several places
also went to growing cities in the West
The second wave were poor and were pesants but were numerous
Many immigrants hoped to get wealthy then go back home, what ended up happening was people stayed or went back and forth
Immigrants settled in cities to be closer to job opportunity
Bohemians, Italians and Hungarians spread through America
-----Ethnic Communities-----
Ethnic enclaves formed quickly
Immimgrants formed ethnic identity first then national identities
Ethnic neighborhood was the focal point of city life
The ethnic community major importance was commercial and cultural
Immigrants got their kinsmen to work with them
Racial disunity was evident in America
The anarchists tried to get people to work by grouping them in class, but they were violent 
(left off at 106 pg 2)
