pg 109-111
in 1861 Russia did reform toward modernization to keep up w/ everyone
Alexander II came to power in 1855, he was an uneducated indecisve guy who relied on his advisors, 
When he came in Russia was being humiliated 
they didn't have enough soldiers ... for the Crimean War ...
as a result they abolished serfdom to get more soldiers
they also realized that after 600 rebellions it was better to just have it abolished
however even though they were free, they were still controlled 

pg 112
state peasants - people who lived on state property
once it was abolished Alex II moved very carefully forming comittees... on how to keep Russia together
the peasants were free to do whatever ...
however the peasants got a little land and had to pay for their own freedom
the Assembly of the the Commue took over and made sure justice was done
the peasants were pissed because they wanted all the land free of charge, they rebelled but not as much...
in late 1800 peasant life sucked, pop. grew, land divisions were smaller so they cld produce too much crop
Alex II also passed judicial reforms so the peasants do not get punished as much

pg 115
local gov't were set up based off three groups (nobles,townsmen,peasants) based off who owned the most land...
zemstvos gov'ts actually made things better
gov't saw they were getting powerful and held them down, but after they let them go and worked w/ them thinking they would accomp. things
1874 they reduce military service from 25 to 6 yrs and made military life easier, but still failed to improve the tech of the military
it didn't workout overall, the country had groups of all ppl and social statuses and they were all upset
the noblility was losing plenty of power and they got mad politically
the nobles sold plenty of land also
what made it worse was that nobles never modernized

pg 118-119
it was hard becuase nobles didn't know how to manage anything, the told the serfs to get the work done
gov't was alarmed, so many nobles disappear no one left to admin. the zemstvos
no provision made to teach new social groups how to hold political offices
this was because poor ppl were being educated and the intelligensia demanded change ASAP
Pisarev started nihilism in reponse saying that "what can be broken shold be broken"
at this point ppl wanted populism and socialism
they tried a go-to-the-people movement where they taught the peasants in the country, but they were confused and turned them to the police

pg 120-123
so reformers struggled between acting in peace or violence
Russia went to war w/ Turkey and imposed treaty of san stefano giving them many lands   
however they lost an embarrising war to great britian and austria, they were mad
then ppl started to come for gov't officials, gov't turned to educated ppl for help but the ppl said no 
they couldn't shut it down, but the public  knew that the gov't couldnt controll things by them and lost faith in them
the rebelllers got bold and tried to kill the tsar twice, the tsar became afraid and stayed away of the ppl
Alex II got more modern ppl into office but he realized fist alone cannot do the job
Loris Melikov went after the heads cldnt get them, and said lets negiotiate allow ppl to run things ...

pg 124-125
Alex II sent Loris plan to a committee who altogether approved, but the People's will TERMINATED it.
they finally killed him by throwing bombs at his chariot
when the tsar died Russia experience turbulence, they said nothing cld stop it and blamed and killed the Jewish people for it what a shame
tsar Alex III said protect the Jews even though he hated them because he didn't want the pogroms to take over Russia, revolutionaries supported them, but later realized they were just racists
Alex III was a narrow-minded guy inspired by Constantine Pobdolivshev who was a professor in Moscow ...

pg 126-127
Pobdolivshev was all about ppl are evil ... gov't and religion needs to control them ... keep em stupid ... nothing about well-being ...
he said that the tsar was the way to go, and that he needs help from elite who are educated ...
he didnt care abt ppl culture only they come to Russian Orthrodoxy, he said the Jews shld convert or ...
gov't then waged war on the revolutionaries using emergency regulation like a mutual state


pg 130 
when Nicholas II came to the throne in 1894 after Alex III died from illness, ppl said he was the most incapable;
guy loved his faminly
